This is a mail box function that is part of the TCP/IP system.  You can read 
mail addressed to you or send mail to someone else in the local area, or 
someone else on the TCP/IP network.  You can download certain selected files.
Here is a command summary:

s  to_call@host  To_call is destination station call without any dash number.
   Host is call sign of the station it is to go to.  Note lack of spaces on
   either side of the '@'.  If you want to leave it posted here, you can leave
   the @host off.  Automatic forwarding is only done to the stations that are
   active on TCP/IP.

r  Reads mail addressed to you.  If there is but one message, r will get it.
   If there are more than one, follow r with a space and the number.  r 1 
   reads message number 1.  There is a delay from the time mail is posted and
   it appears here.  The machine shuffles mail in and out on about a 30 minute
   cycle.

k  kills mail addressed to you.  If there is but one message, k will kill it.
   If there are more, you have to follow k with the message number.  k 1 kills
   message numbe 1.

l  lists messages, if any, for you.  It will show which messages have been
   read, and which ones are marked to be killed.

ll followed by a space and a number, lists the last (number) of messages for
   you.

ls Lists downloadable file names that are in a public directory.  There may
   not be anything there.  If you want to upload a file, use s to me and I'll
   put it in the download area.  Some of the files here may be do nothing
   files that are just there for test.

m  Lists calls of those who have mail here.

g  (filename) Gets a file from the downloadable area.  I will only have small
   text files in that area because I don't want this thing clogging the
   network.  It can send a binary file, but I don't think you would want that.

c  Initiates a chat session which is only effective if I am sitting by the
   computer.  Actually a chat session terminates the mail box process so to
   return to it you have to disconnect and reconnect.

u  Lists users currently connected to the mbox.  It shows some computer
   internal information and the state of each of the connections.

v  Shows the current version of net that I am running.  It is used mostly as
   a diagnostic tool

If you connect using NET/ROM, the mbox issues a prompt upon connect.  If you
are not using NET/ROM, you have to send a carriage return to get the prompt.
This is necessary so it will know you are not one of the network stations
connecting.

Sometimes there may be long delays for a complete response to arrive because of
the _very_ shy nature of the TCP/IP when other stations are using a frequency.
You don't have to wait for responses.  You can issue all your commands at
once and, if the link can manage the queue, the mbox will respond normally.

For example to send a message and leave,

send: s to_call@host
send: subject
send: message (end each line with a carriage return)
send: Ctrl-Z  (on a line by itself)
send: b

As in normal packet practice, it stores exactly what you send, so end the lines
with carriage returns or it will chop up and reformat your text.

If you want to set up your own TCP/IP station to enjoy the features it has,
send me a message and I'll help you get set up.

73 es Enjoy!  K5JB
